Add Best Practices section to Pupil Core documentation (#348)
pupil-labs/pupil-docs: src/core/best-practices.md

---
permalink: /core/best-practices
---

# Best Practices

> *Tips for conducting eye-tracking experiments with Pupil Core.*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Tips for conducting eye tracking experiments with Pupil Core eye tracking platform.*
```

## Calibrating

### Calibrate with Points That Resemble the Experimental Condition
If your stimuli are at a fixed distance to the participant, make sure to place calibration points only at this distance. If the distance of your stimuli varies, place calibration points at varying distances. Make sure that your calibration points cover the outermost bounds of your gaze. Choose a calibration background color and brightness that matches your stimuli.

### Validate Your Calibration

> Make a validation after the calibration to ensure that everything went fine. If the validation reports a high error, you need to perform another calibration. Make sure to use different points for validation than you used for calibration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Perform a validation after the calibration to check the accuracy. If the validation reports a high accuracy error, you need to perform another calibration. Make sure to use different points for validation than you used for calibration.
```

## Avoiding Slippage

> Slippage is the effect of the headset slipping on the participant’s head. This is almost inevitable if the participant moves its head or its facial muscles. Slippage will lead to reduced accuracy and can accumulate over time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Slippage is the effect of the headset slipping on the participant’s head. Slippage is almost inevitable if the participant moves their head or facial muscles. Slippage will lead to reduced accuracy and can accumulate over time.
```

### Split Your Experiment into Blocks

> If your experiment allows for small breaks in between, you should split it into blocks. For every block you should recalibrate (and validate) at the beginning to reset any accumulated slippage errors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your experiment allows for small breaks in between tasks, then you should consider splitting your experiment it into blocks. For every block you should re-calibrate (and validate) at the beginning to reset any accumulated slippage errors.
```

### Choose the Right Pipeline
The 2D detection and mapping pipeline has the best accuracy in perfect conditions (< 1° visual error). However, it is very sensitive to slippage. Chose the 2D pipeline if:
- Your participants do not need to move their heads.
- You can have very short blocks.

> - You want the best possible accuracy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- You want the best possible accuracy.
- You don't need features from the 3D pipeline, like pupil diameter in millimeters. 
```

> The 3D pipeline will adapt itself over time to compensate for slippage errors. The tradeoff is that the best accuracy in perfect conditions is slightly below the accuracy of the 2D pipeline (1.5°–2.0° visual error). Note that slippage will still have an effect on very long recordings. Chose the 3D pipeline if:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The 3D pipeline will adapt itself over time to compensate for slippage errors. The tradeoff is that the best accuracy in perfect conditions is slightly below the accuracy of the 2D pipeline (~1.0°–2.0° visual error). Note that slippage will still have an effect on very long recordings. Chose the 3D pipeline if:
```

- Your participants need to move their heads.
- You cannot split your experiment into small blocks.

> - You are fine with good accuracy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## Record Everything

> You do not have to make fixed decisions for an experiment, as Pupil Player allows for running pupil detection and gaze mapping again with different settings in an offline mode. In order for this to work best, you should record all the data that is needed to run different offline algorithms. Here are the steps to include in your recording:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We recommend starring to record recording prior to calibration. This is valuable because it enables you to record all the data needed for pupil detection and calibration so that you can make adjustments, and even recalibrate post-hoc in Pupil Player if desired. Below is a recommended protocol: 
```

Reviewer 2: You might wanna edit that again, I think there's something wrong with the start of the sentence...

> 1. Start the recording.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Start recording in Pupil Capture.
```

> 1. Ask the participant to slowly look around with the eyes for a couple of seconds to sample different gaze angles. This will allow the 3D model to stabilize at the start. Do this even if you are not using the 3D pipeline to allow for comparison in offline mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Ask the participant to slowly look around while keeping the head stable for a couple of seconds to sample different gaze angles. This will allow the 3D model to stabilize at the start. Do this even if you are not using the 3D pipeline to allow for comparison in offline mode.
```

1. Perform a calibration.
1. Perform a validation. If the error is too high, restart the block.
1. Perform your experiment.
1. Perform another validation. This can give you an estimate of how much slippage error you accumulated during the experiment. If you are recording multiple blocks with a non-fixed calibration setup, you can also re-use the calibration session of the following block as post-validation for the previous block.

> 1. Now you can stop the recording.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Stop recording.
```

## Participants
The less movement you participants will exhibit during an experiment, the more accurate your results will be. This includes movements of head, but also of facial muscles. In order to minimiza unnecessary movement, you should:
- Make sure the participant is in a comfortable position that they can maintain during the experiment.

> - Make sure the participant can read all instructions comfortable and does not need to squint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Make sure the participant can comfortably read all instructions and does not need to squint.
```

> - Ask your participant to keep a relaxed facial expression during the experiment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

I suggest to omit. This is really dependent on the experiment.

Reviewer 2: What do you mean it depends on the experiment? For me moving facial muscles (around the eyes) while keeping a steady gaze will introduce noticeable error to the gaze mapping. This effect should be independent of the experiment. I saw that Tobii recommend something similar.

Reviewer: It should be a note and note a recommendation. Some experiments depend on emotion of the participant, and in this case, researchers should know that this induces slippage. But they should not be limited by this.

> - Ask your participant to keep a relaxed facial expression during the experiment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Note: If the participant can keep a relaxed face during the experiment this will minimize slippage. 
```
